Good day I'm Norman Wildberger this is video
number 100 in this series on the foundations
of mathematics and maybe it's a good time to
pause briefly and celebrate this achievement
of having gotten to number 100 I hope to add many
more videos to this series because there are still
many many things that we want to address we still
have to deal with the weaknesses in real numbers
in the continuum we want to then discuss set
theory and a lot of dubious aspects about that
and then we want to end up building up a new and
alternative point of view towards calculus and
analysis and also perhaps topology and other
things too so still a lot to be done I think
this is probably a good opportunity to dedicate
this series and I would like to dedicate this
series to the Australian taxpayers all right I'm
a employee of the University of New South Wales
but ultimately I am funded by the Australian
taxpayer who pays to let me have time to do
my thinking and to do research and without
that time and support it would be impossible
for me to have understood the things that I've
understood and that I'm able to share with you
so many thanks to the Australian taxpayers for
generously supporting my and of course other
academics researchers in today's lecture we're
going to take first steps towards establishing
a theory of so-called infinite sequences which we
would rather call by a different more modest name
we'll call them on sequences short for ongoing
sequences now I've stressed a lot the very big
difference between finite sequences which we
can pin down completely concretely in which
our computers can handle perfectly and these so
called infinite sequel is that have perhaps an
infinite amount of data involved in them these are
much more problematic and we must be more careful
and deliberate in our attempts of establishing
such a theory well of course a finite sequence
is specified by listing all its elements here
for example is a modest little finite sequence
1 3 5 7 it's listed there and we don't have
to rely on any other alternative description
the listing of the elements is sufficient however
how do we define and specify a so-called infinite
sequence for example how do we hope to deal with
the many examples in Sloane's online encyclopedia
of integer sequences well the approach that
we're going to take is we're going to start
slowly we're going to build up this theory of
odd sequences one step at a time so I have this
open-ended view towards mathematical theories I
think that many subjects including the subject
of sequences is best approached by thinking of it
in terms of compartments small steps that we take
and going further and further and further along
in essentially an unbounded situation so we do
not hope to capture all at once the notion of an
infinite sequence or non sequence we must be more
immodest in our endeavors and just attempt to
cut out small pieces at a time so that's what
we're going to do today we start with first of all
constant on sequences so the definition a constant
on sequence is an expression of the form C equals
bracket K bracket for some K a natural number and
notice that the brackets I'm using are a square
bracket on the left-hand side and a pointy bracket
on the right-hand side which is supposed to remind
us that this is representing ultimately a sequence
in our mind something that has a beginning and
sort of keeps on going in that direction it's just
a notational convention that allows us to remember
that this is supposed to be a sequence at least in
our minds so for example here is an example of
a constant on sequence it's the on sequence one
here's another one it's called B this one is the
constant on sequence five now associated with such
an on sequence we have a sort of a secondary and
important thing that we can do so for any natural
number M the F element of the constant on sequence
C equals nan sequence K is by definition this it's
equal to K so we're defining a new expression
or a new aspect of this expression that we're
allowed to put an index to the right and below
and that index can have any value which is a
natural number and the interpretation of that is
that the output is going to be K the same number
that's appearing inside the brackets so we say
that the empty element of the on sequence K is
K so for example if a is the constant on sequence
1 so then the first element of a a sub 1 is 1 the
second element of a is 1 the third element of a is
1 the hundred and seventy fourth element of a is 1
all of the elements of this constant sequence are
the same they're all equal to what so for example
also if B happens to be the on sequence 5 then
the first element is 5 the second element is 5 the
third element is 5 the 1,001 element is 5 all the
elements in fo are 5 and so somewhat informally
we can write the following which connects with our
intuitive understanding of what it on sequences so
we just write down the elements first one second
one third one fourth one up to a certain amount
and then we write three dots so the odd sequence 1
is 1 1 1 1 and so on the on sequence 5 is 5 5 5 5
and so on we should recognize however that there's
something ambiguous about the three dots the three
dots by themselves do not tell us how the sequence
carries on but this expression here does tell us
two pins down exactly what we're talking about and
in general our notation for sequences with if the
sequence name is a will say that the first element
will write a sub one then the next one a sub 2 a
sub 3 and so on in the usual fashion alright so
this is a way for us to generate on a sequence
in essentially a completely finite way right we
only have three elements really the left bracket
the number and the right bracket and that little
combination is capturing for us what intuitively
we might want to think is an infinite sequence but
there's no need to become philosophical about the
nature of this sequence and you know how does it
go on forever and you know various you know is is
the universe unbounded it does time go on forever
etc we just can work with this completely finite
expression with the added idea that at any point
we can access the MPL iment of this sequence in
this case in a very simple way and now let's also
introduce a useful way of visualizing on sequences
so to visualize a constant on sequence say the
on sequence 5 what we're going to think about
is perhaps a number line and there's the point 5
and we're going to think about having a regularly
flashing light at five blipping flip flip flip
flip maybe every second or every unit of time
equals one it blips at five T equals two at blitz
at five T equals three and flips at five and it
keeps on blipping at five and doesn't do anything
different it's a very simple kind of movie maybe
not too interesting to look at but nevertheless
we can think of this as being somewhat different
from the constant number five which we could also
visualize as simply a constantly lit up point five
so here we have something different we have a
series of blips always at the same point it's a
way of visualizing or thinking about what the odd
sequence is using time as an aid all right now we
can do arithmetic with constant on sequences it's
kind of obvious because on sequences are really
the same as natural numbers for us and so we can
add two on sequences in the obvious way so the
on sequence one plus the odd in sequence five is
the on sequence six and if we want to we can write
it in terms of these sequences with dot dot dots
if we want to we can multiply two of them in the
obvious way two times three is six so in general
the odd sequence K plus the on sequence L is the
come on sequence k plus L and the on sequence
K times the on sequence L is the on sequence K
times L and then you can give some little bit of
thought to this exercise that the usual laws of
arithmetic with natural numbers hold so we have
a complete reflection of the laws of arithmetic
with natural numbers here in universe of these
constant on sequences there are almost the same
as natural numbers but they have a different
interpretation we're thinking of them as a
sequence which just happens to not be changing
so now that we have constant on sequences under
our belt let's move up a rung in the ladder and
talk about Pauli number on sequences and let's
start with a very specific but important a new on
sequence it's the expression that's going to look
like this square bracket and pointer bracket but
the end here does not represent a natural number
the N is actually the letter n the letter N and
we we're going to use the letter and a no other
letter here okay so this uses the letter N and
only this letter so we've written this thing
down what is it or how do we interpret it well
we're gonna make the following definition that
for any natural number M we're gonna say that the
empty element of this on sequence n is here's the
definition the empty element of the on sequence
n is M so the first element of the on sequence
n is 1 the second element of the on sequence n
is 2 the third element of the on sequence n is
3 therefore we might be able to write this that
the on sequence n equals well here's the first
element the second element the third element
the fourth hillman dot dot dot to represent
and it goes on like this this is an informal
expression which is ultimately meaningless by
itself this is actually the real expression so
this is some kind of informal picture that we
associate to the actual object which is right
here how do we visualize this new on sequence
well we also think of it as a series of blips
on the number line but it's a more interesting
series of blips now it starts here so at time T
equals one there's a blip right here and then the
next second or the next minute or whatever unit
of time you're using there's a blip now at two
at the next interval a blip at 3 and so on so
you watch these things you see the sequence of
blips successively moving to the right it's like
a movie you're gonna have to pan to the right to
keep watching it the series of blips is going to
ongoing blip-blip blip-blip and you can watch it
for as much time as you have patience watching it
it never ends keeps on going blip blip blip until
perhaps well there's no more room or or who knows
what so it is a succession of blips starting at
one moving to right this is a visualization of
this new on sequence n we'll just call it N and
it's really an identity sequence in some natural
way it's a very important new object and we'll see
that it's quite a useful and interesting object
so let me remind you about what a poly number is
a poly number is our form of a polynomial it's
a rather more concrete and down-to-earth and
specific definition of a polynomial so for us
a poly number or a polynomial is just a list of
well natural numbers or integers or whatever it
is that we're working with so here for example is
the list 2 0 1 4 which is a poly number and we
have an alternate form for this poly number in
terms of alpha alpha is the pond number 0 1 okay
so this pond number can be written may be a little
bit more familiarly as 2 plus alpha squared plus
4 alpha cubed okay we've talked a lot about poly
numbers and their arithmetic and it stressed the
importance of them now what we're going to do is
we're going to use these poly numbers to generate
a new kind of on sequence of which the N that we
just defined is the simplest example so here's
our definition if P is a polynomial polynomial
for now then the expression P n in brackets with
a square bracket on the left and a pointy bracket
on the right this is a poly number on sequence
and furthermore we define for any natural number
m that the emp'd element of this poly number on
sequence is by definition P of M so note that
the poly number itself always has an N involved no
other letters are allowed only ends but if we want
to evaluate the F element of such a poly number we
substitute the letter n for the number M there's a
bit of confusion possible here so this n is the
letter n this M is representing some arbitrary
natural number the amp element in this on sequence
is by definition P of M for example if P happens
to be the poly number 2 plus alpha squared plus
4 alpha cubed then here is the Associated poly
number on sequence it's 2 plus n squared plus 4
and cubed and we recognize this is a poly number
on sequence in two ways first of all there's this
square bracket on the left and point you bracket
on the right which is alerting us to the fact
this is an odd sequence not something else and
secondly this ends inside here and for us from now
on will often denote a a non sequence okay so this
is a non sequence and the first element in this
odd sequence is what you get when you replace the
end with the number 1 in which case you get 2 plus
1 plus 4 which is 7 the second element in this on
sequence it's what you get when you replace the
letter n with 2 which would be 2 plus 4 plus 32
which is 38 and so on so we can generate the
elements of this on sequence by replacing the
letter n with numbers 1 2 3 4 and so on this
is a poly number on sequence or if you like a
polynomial on sequence the words poly number and
polynomial being almost interchangeable here these
poly number on sequences that we defined naturally
incorporate the constant on sequences that we
defined earlier because after all a constant like
5 can be thought of if we want to as also a poly
number just a constant Pauline umber and the
arithmetic of poly numbers naturally extends to
an arithmetic of poly number on sequences so for
example here are three particular poly number on
sequences the on sequence n the on sequence 2 + 3
n the on sequence n squared plus n cubed and if we
want to write them out in a more familiar kind of
sequence fashion we just write out the first few
terms and then put three dots so this one here
that's our basic upon the number on sequence N
1 2 3 4 this one here is the on sequence that
starts with a 5 and the 8 11 and 14 because I
happen to start with N equals one and this one
here N squared plus n cubed its elements are 2
12 36 and 80 and so on so we can do arithmetic
with these kinds of things for example we could
add these two sequences a plus B well we could
either add them at this level here 1 plus 5 is
6 2 plus 8 is 10 3 plus 11 is 14 4 plus 14 is
18 and so on although that's ambiguous because
the three dots what does it mean but more
precisely we just add this one to this one
2 + 3 n + n gives us 2 + 4 n so that's the new on
sequence it's the sum of these two similarly this
one times this one well we just multiply the N
by the 2 + 3 n to get 2n + 3 N squared and we
write down the elements if we want to and they are
of course just the products of the corresponding
elements of a and B and if we want to we can do
something a little bit more fancy we can create
combinations of things for example we could take
two times this sequence plus three times this one
plus this one squared which is better to think of
in this level here so two times this plus three
times this Plus this thing squared well that's a
computation that we basically make in the world
of poly numbers and then we get some new pollen
number and then we just make an on sequence out
of that so arithmetic with poly number on
sequences basically the same as arithmetic
with poly numbers themselves all right so let's
have a look at Sloane's online encyclopedia of
integer sequences and let's look for some poly
number sequences that are in his list of course
he has many sequences in his list but the sequence
zero which is I suppose an important sequence it's
actually number four in his list so that would be
incorporated in our framework it's the constant
on sequence zero the constant on sequence one also
gets a mention it's sequence number twelve in his
list the on sequence that we're calling n namely
just the identity sequence one two three four five
a sequence of natural numbers themselves that's
number twenty seven the squares is number two
hundred and ninety there it is there n squared the
cubes n cubed is number 578 there it is there and
occasionally other poly number sequences occur
in his list I was looking to see whether there
was some place where one could sort of access all
the polynomial sequences if there's some sort of
separate way of getting them I couldn't find a way
of doing that maybe there is if somebody knows the
way that might be interesting might interesting
to identify which of the sequences on his list
are actually polynomial or poly number sequences
it's going to be obviously only a fraction of the
vast number that he has what are the ones that he
does have is N squared minus one so the sequence
of squares minus one which can also be thought of
as sequence of products of like this is 1 times 3
this is 2 times 4 3 times 5 4 times 6 so product
of successive numbers separated by 2 the sequence
here has for example other interpretations and one
somewhat amusing interpretation it's the number
of ways of interchanging hopping frogs and toads
which are strung along a line with one space in
between them so for example if you have 2 frogs
on the on the line and two toads on this side and
you want to interchange the frogs and toads and
a move in this game it amounts to either moving
a frog or a toad either left or right or jumping
over one of the others so then it takes in this
case eight moves to go from this position to
this position where the toads and the frogs
have reversed so first movies you move this frog
over 1 and then this next stage this toad hops
over that frog and then at the next stage that
toad moves left and so on it turns out there are
eight steps that corresponds to that particular
element in this sequence so if you start off with
three frogs and three toads you might want to
check that takes 15 steps to interchange them
so bringing us again to this point that a sequence
in say the online encyclopedia has many possible
descriptions there are many possible ways of
thinking about what this sequence represents
with these paly number on sequences we are
specifying a particular form for them it really
pins them down in a very precise way so we know
exactly what the sequence is we have a canonical
name or symbol for the sequence now most of the
sequences in his list are are not of this kind so
it's a natural question well how do we deal with
the other infinite sequences how are we going to
extend this kind of thinking to say sequences
given by expressions that are arithmetic 'el
creations from an but more complicated than poly
numbers for example maybe end to the end or maybe
a recursive sequence so this is actually quite
challenging and I'll give you something to think
about is how are you going to extend this kind
of thinking to the next level how do we go beyond
poly number sequences and next time I'm going
to point out some of the challenges in actually
doing that it turns out to be much trickier than
one might like to think very serious hurdles in
concretely precisely extending this idea of on
sequences to more general sequences so we'll talk
about that next time I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening